.TH SANITIZE_FILENAMES 1 "November 2024" "sanitize_filenames 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sanitize_filenames \- sanitize file and directory names to be safer and easier to work with
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sanitize_filenames
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILES...\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsanitize_filenames\fR renames files and directories in-place to make their
names easier and safer to work with on typical UNIX-like systems.
It replaces or normalizes problematic characters (such as whitespace,
punctuation, and certain symbols), collapses repeated separators, and
preserves file extensions.

You can operate on one or more files or directories. When a directory is
given with \fB--recursive\fR, its contents (and optionally nested
directories) are sanitized as well.

Use \fB--dry-run\fR to preview changes without performing any actual renames.

Use \fB--\fR to stop option parsing when a filename begins with a dash.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-r\fR, \fB--recursive\fR
Recursively sanitize directories and their contents. When set, any directory
arguments are walked and all files and subdirectories are renamed according
to the same rules, then the directory itself is renamed.
.TP
\fB-n\fR, \fB--dry-run\fR
Show actions without renaming files. The tool prints what it \fBwould\fR
rename, but leaves the filesystem unchanged.
.TP
\fB-c\fI CHAR\fR, \fB--replacement\fR \fICHAR\fR
Replacement character to use when normalizing disallowed characters.
Defaults to underscore (\fB_\fR).

The replacement must be a single character and cannot be the path separator
(\fB/\fR). A few common choices are \fB_\fR, \fB-\fR, \fB.\fR, or \fB+\fR.
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Show a help message and exit.
.TP
\fB--\fR
Stop option parsing. All subsequent arguments are treated as filenames,
even if they begin with a dash. This is useful for sanitizing files like
\fB\-example name.txt\fR.
.SH BEHAVIOR
.PP
The sanitizer applies rules similar to:
.IP \[bu] 2
Convert the Unicode multiplication sign (\fB×\fR) to \fBx\fR.
.IP \[bu] 2
Replace whitespace and many punctuation characters
(\fB.,\":?'#;&*\\()[]\fR) with the replacement character.
.IP \[bu] 2
Collapse consecutive replacement characters into a single instance.
.IP \[bu] 2
Preserve file extensions where possible; only the "basename" portion is
sanitized, and the extension is reattached.
.IP \[bu] 2
When operating on paths that include directories, only the final path
component is modified; parent directories are left as given unless
sanitizing recursively.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Sanitize a single file in the current directory:
.RS
.nf
sanitize_filenames "My File.txt"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Preview changes without renaming:
.RS
.nf
sanitize_filenames --dry-run "My File.txt"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Recursively sanitize a downloads directory:
.RS
.nf
sanitize_filenames --recursive ~/Downloads
.fi
.RE
.TP
Use \fB-\fR as the replacement character:
.RS
.nf
sanitize_filenames --replacement - "My File.txt"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Sanitize a file whose name starts with a dash:
.RS
.nf
sanitize_filenames -- --weird name.mp3
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Usage error, option parsing error, or other failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mv (1),
.BR find (1),
.BR bash (1)

